---
layout:     post
title:      mykvm
date:       2016-07-26 23:42:00
summary:    kvm-based virtual machine tool booting stos
categories: school
---

[mykvm](https://lse.epita.fr/teaching/epita/x86a.html#project--mykvm)
is a small vm tool written using the KVM API. The goal of this project
is to be able to boot a custom modular kernel designed at the
[LSE](https://lse.epita.fr), called
[stos](https://lse.epita.fr/teaching/epita/stos.html).


## stos

`stos` is a monolithic kernel written in a modular way, used at EPITA in order
to teach basic kernel programming.

Some of the assignments are:

* Memory protection
  * GDT
  * Protected mode

* Events
  * IDT
  * IRQs
  * 8259A PIC
  * i8254 PIT

* Virtual memory
  * 32-bit x86 paging
  * Page mapping
  * IO mapping

## KVM

`KVM` is the Linux Hypervisor that exposes an API for virtualization. It's
usually split in two parts:

* `KVM`, the kernel module
* `QEMU`, device emulation, vm setup

In `mykvm`, `KVM` is used for the vm, vcpu and memory management, through
`ioctl`s.

It allows us to setup a booting environment for `stos`.

## Work

The work done for this project is divided in multiple modules:

##### VM setup

This consists in initializing the following parts of `KVM`:

* `/dev/kvm`
* the virtual machine
* the virtual cpu

And some extras:

* the `IRQ` chip
* the `PIT`

###### Protected mode

Going into protected mode takes care of:

* Setting up all the memory segments to flat.

* Enabling the `%CR0.PE` flag.

###### Paging

Setting up the `%CR3` address, pointing to a temporary page directory handling
the kernel mapping.

We would normally set up the `%CR0.PG` flag, but `KVM` is unable to boot with
that flag set. We will have to go through a trampoline setting the flag and
calling the kernel entry point.

##### Boot interface

Loading the kernel (`stos`) ELF into the memory, then taking care of `stos`'
boot protocol.

That consists in setting up the following parts:

* A boot allocator.

* The boot segments, representing the memory parts that are reserved/available.

* The boot modules, which are the kernel modules that should be loaded in
memory for `stos` to dynamically load them in the `init` phase.

* The command line and the `initramfs`.

This should allow `stos` to boot properly using `KVM`.
