---
layout:     post
title:      nolimix86
date:       2016-01-05 23:42:00
summary:    x86 virtual machine with unlimited registers
categories: llvm
---

`nolimix86` is an attempt to make a basic virtual machine with unlimited
registers.

#### Does it work?

Nope.

#### Why would anyone want that ?

During the [Tiger Compiler]({{ site.baseurl }}/2015/tiger-compiler) project,
the **Instruction Selection** step is targeting multiple targets (MIPS, x86 and
ARM).

The philosophy of the **Tiger Compiler** project is to make every step easily
testable. But it seems like the instruction selection step generates code with
virtual registers (temporaries), that are unlimited.

Let's take a look at the code generated at this step for the x86 target:

```
 .text
l0:
  movl $1, %t1
  movl %t1, %t2
  addl $2, %t2
  push $42
  pop %eax
  push $101
  ret
```

Notice the `%t1` registers, that represent those temporary registers, waiting
for the **Register Allocation** step to be done.

Since we would like to evaluate the output of the students' work on the x86
target, I decided to make a virtual machine (emulator?) allowing the usage of
those kind of registers.

## Parsing

Since correctly parsing x86 assembly is a PITA, and since LLVM provides a
correct x86 assembly parser, I decided to look there and allow those unlimited
registers in LLVM's parser.

This following modifications were applied:

* `X86AsmParser.cpp`: Handle `%t#` registers in the lexer.
* `X86Operand.h`: Handle `%t#` registers as general purpose registers, allowing
  compatibility between general purpose registers and temporaries.

From there, a subclass of `llvm::MCELFStreamer` is creating an AST using various
hacks in order to detect the correct x86 instruction to create. Most of the
instructions opcodes are declared in `src/x86/instructions.hh`, allowing a
range of `MC` opcodes to bind to a specific instructions, without minding the
operands types.

## VM

The virtual machine is actually an AST visitor. So the `instruction pointer` is
actually an iterator on an instruction, and the virtual machine communicates
with the CPU class that holds all the CPU state (registers, flags, ...).

#### Memory

Memory accesses go through the `cpu::mmu` template class, which translates host
< -- > vm addresses, depending on the CPU.

The stack and the heap are wrappers around a big memory chunk that is accessed
through the mmu.

## Testing

In order to test the virtual machine, the final state of the CPU can be dumped
in YAML format. This allows testing to be easily compared in the test suite.
